---
title: Meditation
date: 2022-04-12
---


Meditation is a process, the systematic training of the mind.

Let's first define the scope of this training:
1. **Goal(s):** The goal is [awakening](7wifg0oz), or enlightenment.
   Each buddhist tradition defines it differently.
   I personally see it as a state of mind one reaches and maintains, where it becomes effortless to engage skilfully with day to day life.
   In buddhist terms, the goal is to live a life aligned with [The 8-fold path](kxqaql4m).
2. **Theory(Dharma)**: The journey is also a path.
   Buddhism offers the Dharma, which is a set of teachings that play the role of a map.
   Think of it like a bunch of sign posts laid down by others before you.
   The goal of them is to help you along the way, should you come across the same challenge.
   You can think of it like a bunch of signposts
3. **Teachers/Coaches**: The path is complex and hard to navigate.
   A map is good, but so is proper guidance to help see objects arising in our blind spots.
   The challenge here is in finding guidance that resonates well with you.
4. **Techniques:** This is the actual works needed to be done day in, day out, in order to achieve the goals.
   Meditation is a big umbrella word defining many practices and techniques.
   Mastering each technique, as well as knowing when and how to employ them is critical for progress.
5. **Routines/Habits:** This refers to process that puts all of the above together
   It is critical to ensure that the goal is met.

## Blog posts ✍
  - [Meditation is not about becoming a monk](xikhdqga)
  - [Losing what is dear](vtbi6a8r)
## Books 📚
  - [The Mind Illuminated](tdoz3woj)
